Corporation - a type of company with multiple ownership governed by a corporate charter. Two types of corporations are C-corporations and S-corporations.
cost approach - one of three traditional approaches to value in appraisal theory. In the cost approach, value is based on the estimated land value plus the current cost to reproduce or replace the existing structure, deducting for all accrued depreciation in the property.
cost service index - an adjustment in the subject improvement cost from the original cost to the current cost.
Counteroffer - an offer submitted in response to an offer. It has the effect of overriding the original offer. 
Credit - an agreement in which a borrower receives something of value in exchange for a promise to repay the lender.
evaluation - an analysis of a parcel of real estate in which a value estimate is not necessarily required. The study may be based on the nature, quality, or utility of an interest in the parcel or entire parcel. 
eviction - the lawful expulsion of an occupant from real property.
evidence of title - a document that identifies ownership of property.
examination of title -a review of an abstract to determine current condition of title.
excess land - on an unimproved site, land that is not needed to accommodate a site's highest and best use. On an improved site, the surplus land that is not needed to serve or support the existing improvement. 
installment loan - borrowed money that is repaid in periodic payments, known as installments. 
installment sale - a transaction in which the sales price is paid to the seller in two or more installments over more than one calendar year.
insurable value - portion of asset value recognized under the provisions of a loss insurance policy. 
Insurance - a contract that provides indemnification from specific losses in exchange for a periodic payment. The individual contract is known as an insurance policy, and the periodic payment is known as an insurance premium.
insurance binder - a document that states that temporary insurance is in effect until a permanent insurance policy is issued.
Landlocked - property surrounded on all sides by property belonging to another.
landlord - also called lessor; one who leases a property to another.
lease - a contract between a landlord and a tenant wherein the landlord grants the tenant possession and use of the property for a specified period of time and for a consideration.
leased fee estate - the landlord's interest in a parcel of leased property.
lease option - a financing option that allows homebuyers to lease a home with an option to buy. Each month's rent payment may consist of rent, plus an additional amount that can be applied toward the down payment on an already specified price.
management agreement - a contract between the owner of an income property and a firm or individual who agrees to manage the property.
margin - the difference between the interest rate and the index on an adjustable-rate mortgage. The margin remains stable over the life of the loan, while the index fluctuates.
market approach - one of three approaches to value in appraisal theory; value is estimated by comparing sales of similar properties recently sold to the subject property and adjusting the comparable sales for differences in characteristics to indicate a final value estimate for the subject property.
market conditions - characteristics of the market such as vacancy rates, interest rates, employment levels, and so forth.
market rent - the rent income a property would most probably command if offered in the competitive Market.

credit history - a record of an individual's repayment of debt.
Cul-de-sac - a dead-end street that widens at the end, creating a circular turnaround area.
curable functional obsolescence - a defect caused by a flaw in the structure, material, or design in which the cost to cure the item is less than or the same as the anticipated increase in value afte the item is cured.
curable physical deterioration - an item in need of repair; deferred maintenance. To be curable, the cost of curing the item must be reasonable and economically feasible.
Curtesy - the statutory or common law right of a husband to all or part of real estate owned by his deceased wife, regardless of will provisions, recognized in some states.
Curtilage - area of land occupied by a building, its outbuildings, and yard, either actually enclosed or considered enclosed.
excess rent - the amount of contract rent over market rent; probably created by a favorable lease with a locational advantage, unusual management, or lease origination in a stronger market.
Exchange - a transaction in which property is traded for another property rather than sold for money or other consideration.
exclusive agency listing - a contract between a property owner and one broker that gives the broker the right to sell the property for a fee within a specified period of time but does not obligate the owner to pay the broker a fee if the owner produces his or her own buyer without the broker's assistance. The owner is barred only from appointing another broker within this period.
exclusive right - to sell a contract between a property owner and a broker that gives the broker the right to collect a commission regardless of who sells the property during the specified period of time of the agreement.
insured mortgage - a mortgage that is protected by the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) or by private mortgage insurance (PMI). If the borrower defaults on the loan, the insurer must pay the lender the insured amount.
Interest - a fee charged by a lender for the use of the money loaned; or a share of ownership in real estate.
interest accrual rate - the percentage rate at which interest accrues on the mortgage. 
interest rate - the rent or rate charged to use funds belonging to another.
interest rate buydown plan - an arrangement in which the property seller (or any other party) deposits money to an account so that it can be released each month to reduce the mortgagor's monthly payments during the early years of a mortgage. During the specified period, the mortgagor's effective interest rate is bought down below the actual interest rate.
leasehold estate - a tenant's right to occupy a parcel of real estate for the term of a lease.
legal description - a description of a parcel of real estate that is specific and complete enough for an independent surveyor to locate and identify it.
lessee - the one who receives that right to use and occupy the property during the term of the leasehold estate.
lessor - the owner of the property who grants the right of possession to the lessee.
Leverage - the use of borrowed funds to purchase an asset.
market segmentation - analysis of submarkets within a larger market.
marketable title - title to property that is free from encumbrances and reasonable doubts and that a court would compel a buyer to accept.
mass appraisal - estimate of value for a large number of properties as of a given date; similar properties are valued in a uniform manner by property types with standard methodology.
mean the average in a set of numbers.
mechanic's lien - a statutory lien created to secure payment for those who supply labor or materials for the construction of an improvement to land.
Median - middle figure in a numerically ordered set of data, such that an equal number of values lie above and below the middle figure.

execution - the signing of a contract.
executor/executrix - a person named in a will to administer an estate. The court will appoint an administrator if no executor is named. "Executrix" is the feminine form.
executory contract - a contract in which one or more of the obligations have yet to be performed. 
executed contract - a contract in which all obligations have been fully performed.
express contract - an oral or written contract in which the terms are expressed in words.
interest rate ceiling - the maximum interest rate that may be charged for an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM), as specified in the mortgage note.
interest rate floor - the minimum interest rate for an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM), as specified in the mortgage note.
interim financing - a short-term loan made during the building phase of a project; also known as a construction mortgage.
interim use - temporary use until the property is ready for future highest and best use (e.g., farmland waiting for subdivision approval).
internal rate of return (IRR) - annualized rate of return on capital that equates the value of cash returns over time with the cash invested; the discount rate that makes the net present value of an investment equal to zero.
levy - to assess or collect a tax.
license - (1) a revocable authorization to perform a particular act on another's property; (2) authorization granted by a state to act as a real estate broker or salesperson.
lien - a legal claim against a property to secure payment of a financial obligation.
life estate - a freehold estate in real property limited in duration to the lifetime of the holder of the life estate or another specified person.
life tenant - one who holds a life estate.
Meridian - a vertical (north-south) dividing line used in the rectangular survey method of land description. 
metes and bounds method - legal description of land in which land boundaries are referred to by a point of beginning (POB), a line in a specified direction from this point (metes), and a point of change in direction in the boundary (bounds), until the line has returned to the point of beginning.
mil or mill - one-tenth of one cent; used by some states to express or calculate property tax rates. 
mill rate - calculated by dividing the tax rate by the assessed value of a property.
millage - a tax rate on property, often expressed as mills per dollar value of the property.
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) - provides environmental impact statements.
negative amortization - occurs when an adjustable-rate mortgage is allowed to fluctuate independently of a required minimum payment. A gradual increase in mortgage debt happens when the monthly payment is not large enough to cover the entire principal and interest due. The amount of the shortfall is added to the remaining balance to create negative amortization.
negative leverage - when the cost of borrowed money is more than the property yields.
neighborhood - group of similar land uses within accepted geographical boundaries.
net income - the income produced by a property, calculated by deducting operating expenses from gross income.

extension agreement - an agreement between mortgagor and mortgagee to extend the maturity date of the mortgage after it is due.
external obsolescence - a loss in value of a property because of factors outside the property, such as a change in surrounding land use.
externality - appraisal principle that states that forces outside a property's boundaries may have a positive or negative effect on its value.
extraction - variation of allocation; estimate the total contribution of improvements and deduct improvement value from the total value.
extraordinary assumption - a presumption that, if discovered to be inaccurate, may change the opinions or conclusions of an appraiser.
interval ownership - see time-sharing.
intestate - the state of having died without having authored a valid will.
invalid - not legally binding or enforceable.
investment property - a property not occupied by the owner.
investment value - the value of the property to a particular investor.
investment yield - rate of return on an investment (effective rate). The highest investment yield will have the shortest compounding periods.
limited common elements - items in a multiunit project that are available for use by one or more, but not all units (e.g., parking stalls or storage units).
limited liability company (LLC) - a type of company that has the limited liability advantage of a corporation with the tax status of a sole proprietor or partnership.
limited partnership - ownership arrangement that is passive; limited partners are liable only to the extent of their own capital contributions. Limited partnerships are managed by a general partner, who is individually liable for financial operations.
liquidation value - the value based on a quick sale or less than adequate exposure in the open market. 
minor - a person who has not attained the legal age of majority.
misrepresentation - a misstatement of fact, either deliberate or unintentional.
mode - the most frequent value in a set of numbers.
modification - the act of changing any of the terms of the mortgage.
modified economic age-life method - a method of estimating accrued depreciation in which the ratio of effective age to total economic life is multiplied by the reproduction or replacement cost minus curable physical and functional obsolescence.
net income multiplier (NIM) - property value or sales price divided by its net operating income for a given year. It is the reciprocal of the overall capitalization rate.
net lease - a lease that requires the tenant to pay maintenance and operating expenses, as well as rent. 
net listing - a listing in which the broker's fee is established as anything above a specified amount to be received by the seller from the sale of the property.
net operating income (NOI) - effective gross income (EGI) minus operating expenses (OE). 
net worth - the value of all of a person's assets.
